Add Vector Search workload to benchmark (#9141)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _benchmark/workloads/vectorsearch.md

---
layout: default
title: Vector search
nav_order: 35
---

# Vector search

> The vector Search workload benchmarks OpenSearch's Vector Engine capabilities for both indexing and search operations. It tests various vector search algorithms, quantization methods, and index configurations to measure performance metrics like throughput, latency, and recall accuracy. The workload supports different datasets and can evaluate both trained and untrained vector search methods.

Reviewer: Search -> search in the first sentence

> The vector Search workload benchmarks OpenSearch's Vector Engine capabilities for both indexing and search operations. It tests various vector search algorithms, quantization methods, and index configurations to measure performance metrics like throughput, latency, and recall accuracy. The workload supports different datasets and can evaluate both trained and untrained vector search methods.

Author: ```suggestion
The vector search workload benchmarks OpenSearch's Vector Engine capabilities for both indexing and search operations. It tests various vector search algorithms, quantization methods, and index configurations to measure performance metrics like throughput, latency, and recall accuracy. The workload supports different datasets and can evaluate both trained and untrained vector search methods.
```

| `target_index_body`                       | The path to the target index .definition                                                                                                        |
| `target_index_primary_shards`             | The target index's primary shards.                                                                                                              |
| `target_index_replica_shards`             | The target index's replica shards.                                                                                                              |
| `target_index_dimension`                  | The dimension of the target index.                                                                                                              |
| `target_index_space_type`                 | The target index space type.                                                                                                                    |
| `target_index_bulk_size`                  | The target index bulk size.                                                                                                                     |

> | `target_index_bulk_index_data_set_format` | The format of the vector data set                                                                                                               |

Author: ```suggestion
| `target_index_bulk_index_data_set_format` | The format of the vector dataset.                                                                                                               |
```

> | `target_index_bulk_index_data_set_path`   | The path to the vector data set in the index.                                                                                                   |

Author: ```suggestion
| `target_index_bulk_index_data_set_path`   | The path to the vector dataset in the index.                                                                                                   |
```

| `target_index_bulk_index_data_set_corpus` | The corpus name of the vector data set.                                                                                                         |

> | `target_index_bulk_index_clients`         | The clients to be used for bulk ingestion. Must be a divisor of data set size.                                                                  |

Author: ```suggestion
| `target_index_bulk_index_clients`         | The clients to be used for bulk ingestion. Must be a divisor of dataset size.                                                                  |
```

| hnsw_ef_construction                      | The `HNSW ef` construction parameter.                                                                                                           |
| `id_field_name`                           | The name of the field that will be used to identify documents in an index.                                                                      |
| `hnsw_m `                                 | The `HNSW m` parameter.                                                                                                                         |
| `query_k`                                 | The number of neighbors to return for the search. Only one of `query_k`, `query_max_distance`, and, `query_min_score` can be provided.          |
| `query_max_distance `                     | The maximum distance to be returned for the vector search. Only one of `query_k`, `query_max_distance`, and, `query_min_score` can be provided. |
| `query_min_score`                         | The minimum score to be returned for the vector search. Only one of `query_k`, `query_max_distance`, and, `query_min_score` can be provided.    |

> | `query_data_set_format`                   | The format of the vector data set used for queries. Only one of `query_k`, `query_max_distance`, and, `query_min_score` can be provided.        |

Author: ```suggestion
| `query_data_set_format`                   | The format of the vector dataset used for queries. Only one of `query_k`, `query_max_distance`, and, `query_min_score` can be provided.        |
```

| `query_data_set_path`                     | The path to the vector data set used for queries.                                                                                               |
| `query_count`                             | The number of queries for the search operation.                                                                                                 |
| `query_body`                              | The JSON properties that will be merged with search body                                                                                        |
| `search_clients`                          | The number of clients to use for running queries.                                                                                               |

> | `repetitions`                             | THe number of repetitions until the data set is exhausted. Default is `1`.                                                                      |

Author: ```suggestion
| `repetitions`                             | THe number of repetitions until the dataset is exhausted. Default is `1`.                                                                      |
```

| `target_throughput`                       | The target throughput for each query operation in requests per second. Default is `10`.                                                         |
| `time_period`                             | The period of time dedicated for the run the benchmark test in seconds. Default is `900`.                                                       |

## Test procedures

The workload supports the following test procedures.

> ### No Train Test

Author: ```suggestion
### No train test
```

> The No Train Test procedure tests vector search indices that require no training. You can define the underlying configuration of the vector search algorithm (such as specific engine or space type) as method definitions. Check vector search method definitions for more details.

Author: ```suggestion
The no train test procedure tests vector search indices that require no training. You can define the underlying configuration of the vector search algorithm (such as specific engine or space type) as method definitions. 
```

> ### No Train Test Index Only

Author: ```suggestion
### No train test (Index only)
```

> Th No Train Test Index Only procedure is used to index vector search indexes that require no training. It's particularly useful when you want to benchmark only the indexing operation.

Author: ```suggestion
The no train test (Index only) procedure is used to index vector search indexes that require no training. It's particularly useful when you want to benchmark only the indexing operation.
```

> ### Force Merge Index

Author: ```suggestion
### Force merge index
```

The Force Merge Index procedure optimizes vector search indices by performing force merge operations up to a given maximum number of segments. For large datasets, force merge is a costly operation. Therefore, it's better to have a separate procedure to trigger force merge operations occasionally based on user requirements.

### Search

> The Search procedure benchmarks previously indexed vector search indices. It's useful when you want to benchmark large vector search indices without re-indexing each time, since load time can be substantial for large datasets. This procedure includes warmup operations to avoid cold start problems during vector search.

Author: ```suggestion
The Search procedure benchmarks previously indexed vector search indexes. It's useful when you want to benchmark large vector search indices without re-indexing each time, since load time can be substantial for large datasets. This procedure includes warmup operations to avoid cold start problems during vector search.
```

> ### No Train Test AOSS

Author: ```suggestion
### No train test (AOSS)
```

> The No Train Test AOSS procedure is similar to the No Train Test procedure but is specifically targeted for Amazon OpenSearch Serverless Vector Search Collection. This procedure doesn't include operations like **refresh** and **warmup** since they aren't supported by Vector Search Collection.

Author: ```suggestion
The No train test (AOSS) procedure is similar to the No Train Test procedure but is specifically targeted for Amazon OpenSearch Serverless vector search collection. This procedure doesn't include operations like **refresh** and **warmup** since they aren't supported by Vector Search Collection.
```

### Train Test

> The Train Test procedure benchmarks approximate k-NN search algorithms that require a training step. For example, the FAISS IVF requires a training step to cluster vectors. After the step is performed, the benchmark can search against a smaller number of cluster centroids instead of the entire dataset.

Author: ```suggestion
The Train Test procedure benchmarks approximate k-NN search algorithms that require a training step. For example, the Faiss IVF requires a training step to cluster vectors. After the step is performed, the benchmark can search against a smaller number of cluster centroids instead of the entire dataset.
```

## Custom runners

> Only on custom runner, `warmup-knn-indices`, is supported the the Vector Search workload. This runner will warm up K-NN indexes and retry the warm up until it succeeds. 

Author: ```suggestion
Only one custom runner, `warmup-knn-indices`, is supported in the Vector Search workload. This runner will warm up K-NN indexes and retry the warm up until it succeeds. 
```

| `query_count`                             | The number of queries for the search operation.                                                                                                 |
| `query_body`                              | The JSON properties that will be merged with search body                                                                                        |
| `search_clients`                          | The number of clients to use for running queries.                                                                                               |
| `repetitions`                             | THe number of repetitions until the dataset is exhausted. Default is `1`.                                                                      |
| `target_throughput`                       | The target throughput for each query operation in requests per second. Default is `10`.                                                         |
| `time_period`                             | The period of time dedicated for the run the benchmark test in seconds. Default is `900`.                                                       |

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 45: A word should follow "repetitions". "completed" or "executed"?

## Test procedures

The workload supports the following test procedures.

### No train test

The no train test procedure tests vector search indices that require no training. You can define the underlying configuration of the vector search algorithm (such as specific engine or space type) as method definitions. 

> ### No train test (Index only)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### No train test (index only)
```

> The no train test (Index only) procedure is used to index vector search indexes that require no training. It's particularly useful when you want to benchmark only the indexing operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The no train test (index only) procedure is used to index vector search indexes that require no training. This can be particularly useful when you want to benchmark only the indexing operation.
```

### No train test (AOSS)

> The No train test (AOSS) procedure is similar to the No Train Test procedure but is specifically targeted for Amazon OpenSearch Serverless vector search collection. This procedure doesn't include operations like **refresh** and **warmup** since they aren't supported by Vector Search Collection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The no train test (AOSS) procedure is similar to the no train test procedure but is specifically used for Amazon OpenSearch Serverless vector search collections. This procedure doesn't include operations like **refresh** and **warmup** because they aren't supported by vector search collections.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Global: Are the names of the procedures supposed to be initially capitalized? Sometimes they are and sometimes they aren't. We would also need to define AOSS, which Amazon does not use as an abbreviation for Amazon OpenSearch Serverless, FYI.

Author: I still AOSS crop up in Dev drafts from time to time since its the prefix for Serverless (https://docs.aws.amazon.com/service-authorization/latest/reference/list_amazonopensearchserverless.html). Noted. 

As far as the names of the procedures, there isn't a rule ATM. Likely less confusing if we lowercase them.

Author: I added suggestions fixing the AOSS note. Let me know what you want to do with the casing of procedures.

> The no train test (AOSS) procedure is similar to the no train test procedure but is specifically used for Amazon OpenSearch Serverless vector search collections. This procedure doesn't include operations like **refresh** and **warmup** because they aren't supported by vector search collections.

Author: ```suggestion
The no train test procedure for Amazon OpenSearch Serviceless procedure is used specifically for Amazon OpenSearch Serverless vector search collections. This procedure doesn't include operations like **refresh** and **warmup** because they aren't supported by vector search collections.
```

### Force merge index

> The Force Merge Index procedure optimizes vector search indexes by performing force merge operations up to a given maximum number of segments. For large datasets, force merge is a costly operation. Therefore, it's better to have a separate procedure to trigger force merge operations occasionally based on user requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Force Merge Index procedure optimizes vector search indexes by performing force merge operations up to a given maximum number of segments. For large datasets, force merging is a costly operation. Therefore, we recommend using a separate procedure to occasionally trigger force merge operations based on user requirements.
```

### Train test

The Train Test procedure benchmarks approximate k-NN search algorithms that require a training step. For example, the Faiss IVF requires a training step to cluster vectors. After the step is performed, the benchmark can search against a smaller number of cluster centroids instead of the entire dataset.

> 

Author: @natebower: Updated.

### Search

> The Search procedure benchmarks previously indexed vector search indexes. This can be useful when you want to benchmark large vector search indexes without reindexing each time because load time can be substantial for large datasets. This procedure includes warmup operations intended to avoid cold start problems during vector search.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The search procedure benchmarks previously indexed vector search indexes. This can be useful when you want to benchmark large vector search indexes without reindexing each time because load time can be substantial for large datasets. This procedure includes warmup operations intended to avoid cold start problems during vector search.
```

## Custom runners

Only one custom runner, `warmup-knn-indices`, is supported in the Vector Search workload. This runner will warm up K-NN indexes and retry the warm up until it succeeds. 

## Running the workload

To run the Vector Search workload, use the following command:

```bash
export ENDPOINT=<cluster-endpoint>
export PARAMS_FILE=<params-file-path>

opensearch-benchmark execute-test \
    --target-hosts $ENDPOINT \
    --workload vectorsearch \
    --workload-params ${PARAMS_FILE} \
    --pipeline benchmark-only \
    --kill-running-processes
```
{% include copy.html %}

## Sample results

When using the Vector Search workload, you can expect results similar to the following.

### Train test procedure

> The following example shows results from the train test procedure:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example provides results from the train test procedure:
```

|                                     99.99th percentile latency |       prod-queries |     39.7922 |     ms |
|                                       100th percentile latency |       prod-queries |      62.415 |     ms |
|                                   50th percentile service time |       prod-queries |     3.43405 |     ms |
|                                   90th percentile service time |       prod-queries |      4.0191 |     ms |
|                                   99th percentile service time |       prod-queries |     5.56316 |     ms |
|                                 99.9th percentile service time |       prod-queries |     9.95666 |     ms |
|                                99.99th percentile service time |       prod-queries |     39.7922 |     ms |
|                                  100th percentile service time |       prod-queries |      62.415 |     ms |
|                                                     error rate |       prod-queries |           0 |      % |

---------------------------------
[INFO] SUCCESS (took 119 seconds)
---------------------------------
```

### Faiss results

> The following sample outputs are from the Faiss IVF benchmarking procedure. For brevity, the test used 100 search queries instead of the 10,000 specified in the parameter files. All other parameters remain the same as those in the `params/train` folder. The first run demonstrates results without quantization, the second run shows scalar quantization, and the third run illustrates product quantization. Note that quantization may cause search recall to drop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following sample outputs were generated using the Faiss IVF benchmarking procedure. For brevity, the test used 100 search queries instead of the 10,000 specified in the parameter files. All other parameters remain the same as those in the `params/train` folder. The first run demonstrates results without quantization, the second run demonstrates scalar quantization, and the third run demonstrates product quantization. Note that quantization may cause search recall to drop.
```
